In the last lecture, we were almost there,
we almost created our bars but the issue is we have problems with positioning them,
thankfully d3.js offers some help. Before I actually create the bars
but the position doesn't really matter,
I want to define my scales and I need to define a yScale and I need to find an xScale, that
will define where things are positioned and how they are scaled.
Let's start with the yScale, we can use the scale property in d3 and there, we get a couple of scales
we can use.
Now for the yScale, I want to use the linear scale which means if the first item is 5 and the second
is 10, the 10 item with the value of 10 should be double the size of the first one.
It's a linear scale,
bigger means grow linearly.
For this, I also need to pass a domain which is my input data and that actually is an array where I define
my minimum and my maximum and the maximum,
well for us here if we have a look at our data,
that simply is 11,
so let's set this to 11. That defines well how should you scale it
because by default, linear scales between 0 and 1 and now we adjusted this to 0 to 11 to fit our
data.
We also need to define the output range, we defined the input range,
which values do our items have,
now we want to tell it, well to which should you scale it, to which output, pixels in the end
and keep in mind, here of course we have way more than 0 to 11,
we have the full height available for the y-axis.
However here it's important to know how the coordinate system d3 uses works.
It starts in the top left corner, which means there we have 0, 0
and then we can go to the right and increase the number or down and increase the number.
Therefore the output range is actually not 0 to height which you could think
but instead it's height to 0 due to this coordinate system which starts in top left corner and on
the bottom left.
So this means scale my items to fit the pixels we have available which is the maximum height we have
and well 0 to be at the very top and therefore, 0 which is at the very top of our coordinate system needs
to fit our biggest number since this should be the highest chart or the highest bar.
That's the yScale, now the xScale,
here we also want to use d3 scale,
however here I will use an ordinal scale. Ordinal because our category is no number,
it's text and that is what's on the x-axis, so we can't use linear there because how will you scale
text linearly? They are discrete values,
that is why we use ordinal here.
We still need to provide a domain, our input data though and that simply is our array of categories.
So here I can pass static data and use the map method to only extract the categories so that I don't
have an array of objects which have value and category but just an array of strings which contains just
the categories.
Map is a built-in function Javascript arrays offer and there, we can basically
or this will basically execute a function we define here,
also an arrow function for every element in this array,
so for every object we have here. In the return statement, we tell it what we want to map to,
so which value we want to use for each item.
Here I simply want to return data point category which basically means turn this object which had value
in string or value in category into,
well just a normal string because we omit the rest here, we just return a string,
just return a category.
So we have an array of strings as our domain, as our input data now,
the range, the output data
now again is an array and that should be 0 to width
because here we go from left to right.
We start in the top left but for the x-axis, this doesn't matter,
here, the we start on the left is important,
so from 0 to width and I will actually not use range but I will use rangeRoundBands where I can also
define some padding I want to have between these items because we have an ordinal scale, we have some
discrete values,
I don't want to have them sit right next to each other, so I will pass a padding of 0.1, that as percentage
not pixels and that's all I want to have between these items.
We can also pass 0.2 maybe for an outer padding so that we don't have the leftmost and rightmost bars
sit right on the edges of our chart.
So that's the xScale, that was a lot of talking, what can we do with these scales now?
Well we can use them here where we define attributes for our bars, for the width,
we no longer need to set 20,
instead we can use our xScale and call rangeBand here which is a method which will automatically give
us the right width depending on how big our viewport is.
Remember, we do use this here in our xScale set up and therefore, it will automatically recalculate
the scale for us,
that is awesome.
The same for the height, the value does of course matter
because that is important for defining the right height of the bar
but we don't need to take it
times three
instead we want to respect the actual viewport
we have available. So here, what I will use is my yScale set up and here I can pass my number.
Now I need to explicitly cast this to a number though by adding lower than number or greater than, this
will explicitly cast it so that Typescript knows that this is a number, what we pass here
and it's data value of course, not number and remove this.
So however, this would be wrong because for the biggest value, 11, this would give us the 0 range here,
the maximum we define here in the range,
so it would push it only 0px down because remember, we start in the top right.
That would mean we won't see any chart because if we don't push it down a little piece, we can't see a
chart,
instead we actually want to push it down the full height for the biggest chart.
So what we need to do is we need to take height
minus our derived scale,
this will make sure that the biggest chart is pushed all the way down to the x-axis and then starts there
whilst the smaller chart is pushed down even more because our full height is then used for that.
So we have full height
and then again full height down so that our smallest chart only glimpses above the x-axis.
Speaking about that, we finally can tackle our positioning issue here.
We can set the x-axis
now, taking into account our data and passing it into this arrow function and there we can use xScale
again to derive where this should sit
and we can simply pass in our category because the x-axis use the ordinal scale, discrete values. The
y position is
also interesting, here
I also will pass in the data
and now we can use the yScale, here
I want to cast this to a number again because I want to access data value and this will give me the y position.
Finally there, let's save this and let's reload our chart and we should see four bars here with the right
sizing, we can't see any labels, we will add this later
but what we can see is that if we have a look at our static data, the third item is in there the biggest
one,
the first one is the second biggest and that is pretty much what we see here.
So that is how we can create our very basic chart,
however one thing we see too is that if we resize this, it doesn't resize the chart.
Now didn't I tell you that it should?
It doesn't,
all we need to do is implement a tiny change.
First of all, we should quit after adding the data here and call enter on bars in a separate line, so
that the bar is which is stored in the variable is just our data we assigned to the selected elements
and then at the very end of the update method, we can call bars exit remove
and what this does is, it basically will remove the elements whenever necessary
and this is now required so that it can repaint them because when we resize the element, it fires
the update method again and it tries to repaint them
but since we use data binding as I told you, it already recognizes I get all the bars I need.
So it doesn't remove them,
we need to remove them here so that we remove the data binding basically, so that when update runs again,
we repaint it correctly.
Now if you hit control save and you go back, you can see that, whoops, once we reload this, it will resize
as you resize this chart.
That is our first chart created,
let's move on.